Data Scholars Program
=============================

Overview

The Data Science Undergraduate Studies and D-Lab co-developed the Data
Scholars Program to respond to data science education inequity. The
program exists to address under-representation issues in the data
science community. Through the seminar series, it establishes a
welcoming, educational, and empowering group for marginalized
communities and nontraditional students. This program was launched in
Fall 2016, and it is especially suited for students who bring diverse
and positive contributions to data science. The program offers
specialized tutoring, advising, and workshops in a sequence of three
1-unit seminar courses. Students apply to join the first seminar, Data
Scholars Foundations, concurrent with the semester they enroll in the
Foundations of Data Science Course and may participate in the Data
Scholars Pathways seminar and Data Scholars Discovery seminar in
subsequent semesters.

Target Audience

Underrepresented and nontraditional students are the intended Data
Scholar program participants. The goal is to develop a strong community
and data science support for students who might not otherwise have it.
This space offers students a sense of belonging and being a part of
transformative learning while navigating challenges in courses and
deciding about a possible future in data science.

Goals

The Data Scholars program benefits students in three essential areas:

-   Support: Skill-building workshops, tutoring, and homework help are
    > available for students to gain additional peer-to-peer
    > collaboration and instructor assistance.

-   Community: Throughout the seminars, students participate in social
    > events and talks that emphasize diversity in data sciences. For
    > example, a data scientist or researcher may come to the Pathways
    > Seminar and present their work to the small group with an open
    > question-and-answer section so that students can actively
    > participate.

-   Mentorship: Graduate students, postdocs, faculty, staff, and alumni
    > from Cal mentor students. The program has a robust underlying
    > network of professionals that students can be referred to by their
    > instructor for specific questions and connections.

Key Pedagogical or Curricular Strategies

The program consists of three seminars:

-   Data 8 Section and Foundations Seminar

    -   Students enrolling in Data 8 can apply to join Data Scholars.
        > Students will enroll in a Data Scholars-only lab section for
        > Data 8, and join a specialized 1-unit Foundations seminar.
        > Students will also have access to special office hours and
        > mentorship for academic support.

-   Data Science Pathways Seminar

    -   For students who have already completed Data 8 and the
        > Foundations seminar, the Pathways seminar supports long-term
        > discovery experiences and career orientation. Pathways will
        > feature guest speakers from research and industry, and special
        > workshops for career and professional development,
        > portfolio-building, and goal-setting.

    -   This seminar will meet for 90 minutes once a week.

-   Data Science Discovery Seminar

    -   For students who have completed the Pathways seminar and have
        > two or more semesters of data science coursework completed,
        > the Discovery Seminar provides special workshops. The [[Data
        > Science Discovery Research
        > program](https://data.berkeley.edu/research/discovery)]{.underline}
        > offers instruction on science tools, facilitates student
        > matching onto some of the ongoing research projects, and
        > offers research mentorship by experienced grad students and
        > staff.

Key Diversity and Inclusion Practices and Strategies:

Foundational Data Science coursework challenges students. Data Scholars
provides extra support for Underrepresented students for this
coursework. The assistance provided in the Foundations Seminar allows
students to easily ask questions and receive answers from peers and
their instructor. The increased support allows for a greater likelihood
of success in data science courses. Students can join smaller group
discussions about assumptions regarding perceptions of success, meeting
faculty, people in the private sector, and networking. The following two
seminars offer an introduction to data science careers and research.

Links to Key Documents

-   Data Scholars [[
    > Website](https://data.berkeley.edu/academics/resources/data-scholars)]{.underline}

-   [[Article posted about the launch of Data
    > Scholars]{.underline}](https://data.berkeley.edu/news/berkeleys-data-scholars-next-gen-data-scientists)

-   [[Spring 2020 Data Scholars
    > Application]{.underline}](https://forms.gle/bqSkPGirTugZ9KBAA)

-   Data Scholars Facilitator [[Job
    > Description]{.underline}](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wnPUDqCA0BK8vbkntlG3VQAqwA2vFEIa9Cyon7r1-eM/edit)

-   [[Foundations Set-Up
    > Guidance]{.underline}](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1yVivmW_8_6vLeirFp7WDEoWRC2gwPwFq3USV_FZQHHY/edit)

Program Description

The Data Science Undergraduate Studies offers community to
underrepresented students and nontraditional students in data science at
Cal with the Data Scholars program. The program consists of an
application process, a Foundations Seminar to help with the Foundations
of Data Science course, a Pathways Seminar that exposes students to
avenues within data science, and the Data Scholars Discovery Projects
seminar supporting their collaborative work. The program provides
students with a welcoming and growth-mindset network of peers, mentors,
and community organizations.

Best Practices for Variation Across Institutions

Developing and supporting one or more staff roles focused on the Data
Scholars program helps with the ongoing work necessary to keep a Data
Scholars program thriving. With minimal support staff, the program
becomes restricted in specific ways, and its success can be limited.
