Domain Connector Courses
=================================

Overview

The Domain Connector Courses program weaves together core concepts and
approaches from Data 8 with complementary ideas or areas. These courses
allow students to use analytic tools from the *Foundations Course* and
apply them within diverse disciplinary contexts. Students will gain
additional experience, broader insights, and deeper theoretical or
computational foundations. Courses include a combination of data science
and domain-specific material, and are developed for and with departments
across campus. The Connector Courses program are semester-long courses
within a domain area, while the Data Science Modules are shorter lessons
within an existing course.

Program Description

The Connector Courses bring together domain-specific instruction and
outreach to faculty and instructors interested in doing the curriculum
development, along with support from student developers and open-access
materials, that benefit both the students and the repository of courses.

A key feature of the Connector Courses is the iterative process of
development, and the repeated offering of the course. The open-access
curriculum guide provides those who are considering developing or taking
a Connector Course with specific and accessible information.

The Connector Courses program has two facets:

-   The undergraduate data science student development along with the
    > implementation of the curriculum by faculty and graduate students

-   The undergraduate data science student experience in applying data
    > science

Target Audience

The Domain Connector Courses are an opportunity for students looking to
explore a specific domain area (in a two-unit seminar) that is
entry-level by design, specifically meant *not* to be overwhelming.
These courses are intended to be taken in the same semester as the
Foundations Course, although many students also take them after they
have taken the Foundations Course.

Goals

A Connector Course allows students to weave together core concepts and
strategies from the Foundations Course with complementary class topics.
Along the way, students gain additional experience, broader insights,
and deeper theoretical or computational foundations. Instructors from
across campus teach Domain Connector Courses. Data 8 and Connectors
complement each other and often use similar materials, tools, and course
infrastructure (e.g., DataHub, Piazza, Jupyter Notebooks).

Key Pedagogical or Curricular Strategies

Connector Courses are based on active learning as students navigate data
science methodologies in class. Active learning is a method of learning
in which students are actively or experientially involved in the
learning process and where there are different levels of active
learning, depending on student involvement ([Bonwell & Eison
1991](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_learning#CITEREFBonwellEison1991)).
The students are able to develop ways to evaluate trends in the data
examples or those they have found pertaining to a specific field or
sector.

Because the [[Undergraduate Student Instructors
(UGSIs)]{.underline}](https://eecs.berkeley.edu/resources/gsis/prospective/ugsi)
are a part of the support network, there is also a very deliberate and
consistent near-peer learning model in action throughout the classes.
UGSIs are students that (a) have already taken the course and received a
high mark, (b) are in good academic standing, and (c) enroll in or have
taken a pedagogy class. Student instructors who assist with Connector
Courses are called *Connector Assistants* (CA).

The courses use open-source [[Jupyter
Notebooks]{.underline}](https://jupyter.org/) with materials stored and
made accessible on GitHub. A Connector Course's GitHub site includes
materials accessible to the students as well as private, locked
materials, such as homework solutions and exam answer keys, that are
only accessible to the faculty and CAs.

Key Diversity and Inclusion Practices and Strategies

The diverse courses allow for students across general interests to take
classes together. For example, a psychology student could take a
psychology-specific Connector Course and a data science student could be
interested in the application in psychology.

As well, this program matches student developers to assist in the
creation of materials for the courses. They can help brainstorm ideas
and translate them into Python. The faculty work with students in close
collaboration. Students can receive payment for this work in the summer
to early semester weeks. This feedback loop allows faculty and
instructors to experience the learning and development of course
materials with an experienced data science developer student.

A second significant opportunity for both the course instructor and
students is that the Data Science Undergraduate Studies (DSEP) can match
up one or more undergraduates to assist with the course throughout the
semester. They do not do any grading but do answer questions during lab
sections, proofread notebooks, maintain the course website, develop
course materials, etc. The specific tasks a Course Assistant (CA) takes
on can vary based on the instructors' and the CA's interests.

Domain Connector Courses serve as the developers of the Data Science
Undergraduate Studies (DSEP) for the campus at large. The approach and
aim have been to do as much outreach as possible, exploring as many
courses with faculty across departments and waiting to see which courses
thrive and succeed.

The policy is that DSEP staff will recruit and assign one CAper 30 seats
in the Connector. The instructors are free to decline the help. The
tasks of the CA will be to attend class and hold one office hour per
week. The instructors are fully encouraged to work out alternative
arrangements with their CAs that fit their needs better.

Links to Key Cyber Resources

-   Domain Connector Course
    > [[GitHub]{.underline}](https://ds-connectors.github.io/)

-   Domain Connector Course
    > [[website]{.underline}](https://data.berkeley.edu/education/connectors)

-   Frequently asked Questions
    > [[website]{.underline}](https://data.berkeley.edu/connector-faqs)

-   [[Curriculum Guide & Online
    > Textbook]{.underline}](https://ds-modules.github.io/curriculum-guide/intro)

-   [[Information on student help with
    > courses]{.underline}](https://ds-modules.github.io/curriculum-guide/connector/instructor/student-help.html)

-   [[Existing Courses]{.underline}](https://github.com/ds-connectors)

-   [[List of Previous
    > Courses]{.underline}](https://ds-modules.github.io/curriculum-guide/connector/general/previous-connectors.html)

-   [[Course GitHub]{.underline}](https://ds-connectors.github.io/)

-   [[Current Course
    > Listings]{.underline}](https://data.berkeley.edu/academics/undergraduate-programs/data-science-offerings/spring-2020-courses)

-   [[DSEP Website]{.underline}](http://data.berkeley.edu): includes
    > links to information

The non-public documents are in private repositories for some of the
connector courses. The faculty make them restricted to store the answer
keys, etc. Therefore, there can be two repositories for each class. One
is available to everyone and one is kept private for instructors.

An example of a Domain Connector Course

Faculty select how to share their course materials (syllabus, slides,
etc). This may include:

-   Google website

-   Personal or Course GitHub

-   Google Drive

The following are a series of materials used to publicize and implement
the course *Data Science and the Mind.*

This is the listing on the Data Science Connector Courses
[[website]{.underline}](https://data.berkeley.edu/education/connectors).

![](media/media/image1.png){width="6.5in" height="0.7222222222222222in"}

Expanded Listing
[[website]{.underline}](https://data.berkeley.edu/data-science-and-mind-cogsci-88)

[![Text Description automatically
generated](media/media/image17.png){width="6.400655074365704in"
height="2.3489588801399823in"}](https://data.berkeley.edu/crime-and-punishment-taking-measure-us-justice-system)

GitHub
[[website]{.underline}](https://github.com/ds-connectors/COGSCI-88)
course listing

![Graphical user interface, text, application Description automatically
generated](media/media/image5.png){width="6.5in"
height="1.1388888888888888in"}

Best Practices for Variation Across Institutions

Each replication campus will need to carefully examine and support the
development of partnerships based on the interest of instructors and
students. A second consideration is how data science programs will keep
these courses active after the teams create and deploy them. There needs
to be a campus-specific system for the listing of existing course
content, cycles of development, and deployment. All CAs are enrolled in
a two-unit DeCal course, *Teaching Data Science - Connectors*. This
DeCal provides them with the training needed to assist with the
Connector courses. The DeCal consists of 90 hours of work for the
semester, 39 hours of which will be spent on training and outside work
for the DeCal course. The remaining 51 hours will be spent on any work
related to the Connector Course. Here is how we have broken down these
51 hours:

-   9 hours of meetings with the Connector instructor

-   15 weeks x 2 hours weekly = 30 hours of Connector course labs

-   15 weeks x 1 hour weekly = 15 hours of office hours or lab prep

Other Implementation Notes

-   At UC Berkeley, there is an early summer workshop for instructors
    > and then biweekly meetings for Connector instructors. The workshop
    > and meetings cover Piazza for instructors, a teaching guide for
    > first-time Domain Connector Course instructors, and allow for the
    > creation of a cohort of people who are now more familiar with one
    > another each year.

-   Some of these courses have been developed and can replace other
    > required courses for students in specific departments. Examples
    > include:

    -   Computer Science 88 can be taken instead of Computer Science 61A

    -   Statistics 89 can be taken instead of Math 54

Recommendations

There is a need for strong inter-departmental connections throughout the
university. One way to address this concern is to collect data about how
some inter-departmental connections work and others do not. This data
would illuminate arguments for different supports, training, and
follow-ups.

Second, graduate student research projects could be used to develop
Connector Courses. There is a need for faculty or graduate students to
include spatial data into one or more additional Connector Courses.

Third, the process of outreach could be more systematic and less
organic. It is important that all instructors have an equal opportunity
to develop a Connector. At larger campuses, it may be difficult to
spread and publicize information about this course development
opportunity.

Fourth, faculty may need a course release to develop a robust Connector
Course. It is challenging for faculty to take the time to do this
development and balance other responsibilities.

Fifth, many excellent Connector Courses have been developed by postdocs,
lecturers, librarians, and other academic staff. These instructors may
have more data science knowledge than tenured faculty and may be more
motivated to develop a new course. A system to either recognize or
compensate these para-academic instructors could speed up the
development process.

What is the process for becoming a Connector instructor?

What are the criteria to accept a new course or not?
